This said, brave Hector through the Troy's bane-bringing knight;
  Made issue to th' insatiate field, resolv'd to fervent fight.
  And as the Weather-wielder sends to seamen prosp'rous gales,
  When with their sallow polish'd oars, long lifted from their falls,
  Their wearied arms, dissolv'd with toil, can scarce strike one
    stroke more;
  Like those sweet winds appear'd these lords, to Trojans tir'd
    before.
  Then fell they to the works of death. By Paris’ valour fell
  King Arëithous' hapless son, that did in Arna dwell,
  Menesthius, whose renownéd sire a club did ever bear,
  And of Phylomedusa gat, that had her eyes so clear,
  This slaughter'd issue. Hector's dart strook Eionëus dead;
  Beneath his good steel casque it pierc'd, above his gorget-stead.
  Glaucus, Hippolochus's son, that led the Lycian crew,
  Iphinous-Dexiades with sudden jav'lin slew,
  As he was mounting to his horse; his shoulders took the spear,
  And ere he sate, in tumbling, down, his powers dissolvéd were.
  When gray-ey'd Pallas had perceiv'd the Greeks so fall in fight,
  From high Olympus' top she stoop'd, and did on Ilion light.
  Apollo, to encounter her, to Pergamus did fly,
  From whence he, looking to the field, wish'd Trojans' victory.
  At Jove's broad beech these Godheads met; and first Jove's son
    objects;
  "Why, burning in contention thus, do thy extreme affects
  Conduct thee from our peaceful hill? Is it to oversway
  The doubtful victory of fight, and give the Greeks the day?
  Thou never pitiest perishing Troy. Yet now let me persuade,
  That this day no more mortal wounds may either side invade.
  Hereafter, till the end of Troy, they shall apply the fight,
  Since your immortal wills resolve to overturn it quite."
  Pallas replied: "It likes me well; for this came I from heav'n;
  But to make either armies cease, what order shall be giv'n?"
  He said: "We will direct the spirit, that burns in Hector's breast,
  To challenge any Greek to wounds, with single pow'rs impress'd;
  Which Greeks, admiring, will accept, and make some one stand out
  So stout a challenge to receive, with a defence as stout."
  It is confirm'd; and Helenus (king Priam's lovéd seed)
  By augury discern'd th' event that these two pow'rs decreed,
  And greeting Hector ask'd him this: "Wilt thou be once advis'd?
  I am thy brother, and thy life with mine is ev'nly prized.
  Command the rest of Troy and Greece; to cease this public fight,
  And, what Greek bears the greatest mind, to single strokes excite.
  I promise thee that yet thy soul shall not descend to fates;
  So heard I thy survival cast, by the celestial States."
  Hector with glad allowance gave his brother's counsel ear,
  And, fronting both the hosts, advanc'd just in the midst his spear.
  The Trojans instantly surcease; the Greeks Atrides stay'd.
  The God that bears the silver bow, and war's triumphant Maid,
  On Jove's beech like two vultures sat, pleas'd to behold both parts
  Flow in to hear, so sternly arm'd with huge shields, helms, and
    darts.
  And such fresh horror as you see, driv'n through the wrinkled waves
  By rising Zephyr, under whom the sea grows black, and raves;
  Such did the hasty gath'ring troops' of both hosts make to hear;
  Whose tumult settled, 'twixt them both, thus spake the challenger:
  "Hear, Trojans, and ye well-arm'd Greeks, what my strong mind,
    diffus'd
  Through all my spirits, commands me speak: Saturnius hath not us'd
  His promis'd favour for our truce, but, studying both our ills,
  Will never cease, till Mars, by you, his rav'nous stomach fills.
  With ruin'd Troy, or we consume your mighty sea-borne fleet.
  Since then the gen'ral peers of Greece in reach of one voice meet,
  Amongst you all, whose breast includes the most impulsive mind,
  Let him stand forth as combatant, by all the rest design'd.
  Before whom thus I call high Jove, to witness of our strife:—
  If he with home-thrust iron can reach th' exposure of my life,
  Spoiling my arms, let him at will convey them to his tent,
  But let my body be return'd, that Troy's two-sex'd descent
  May waste it in the fun'ral pile. If I can slaughter him,
  Apollo honouring me so much, I'll spoil his conquer'd limb,
  And bear his arms to Ilion, where in Apollo's shrine
  I'll hang them, as my trophies due; his body I'll resign
  To be disposed by his friends in flamy funerals,
  And honour'd with erected tomb, where Hellespontus falls
  Into Ægæum, and doth reach ev'n to your naval road,
  That, when our beings in the earth shall hide their period,
  Survivors, sailing the black sea, may thus his name renew:
  'This is his monument whose blood long since did fates imbrue,
  Whom, passing far in fortitude illustrate Hector slew.'
  This shall posterity report, and my fame never die."
  This said, dumb silence seiz'd them all; they shaméd to deny,
  And fear'd to undertake. At last did Menelaus speak,
  Check'd their remissness, and so sigh'd, as if his heart would
    break:
  "Ah me! But only threat'ning Greeks, not worthy Grecian names! [2]
  This more and more, not to be borne, makes grow our huge defames,
  If Hector's honourable proof be entertain'd by none.
  But you are earth and water all, which, symboliz'd in one,
  Have fram'd your faint unfi'ry spirits; ye sit without your hearts,
  Grossly inglorious; but myself will use acceptive darts,
  And arm against him, though you think I arm 'gainst too much odds;
  But conquest's garlands hang aloft, amongst th' Immortal Gods."
  He arm'd, and gladly would have fought; but Menelaus, then,
  By Hector's far more strength, thy soul had fled th' abodes of men,
  Had not the kings of Greece stood up, and thy attempt restrain'd;
  And ev'n the king of men himself, that in such compass reign'd,
  Who took him by the bold right hand, and sternly pluck'd him back:
  "Mad brother, 'tis no work for thee, thou seek'st thy wilful wrack!
  Contain, though it despite thee much, nor for this strife engage
  Thy person with a man more strong, and whom all fear t' enrage;
  Yea whom Æacides himself, in men-renowning war,
  Makes doubt t' encounter, whose huge strength surpasseth thine by
    far.
  Sit thou then by thy regiment; some other Greek will rise
  (Though he be dreadless, and no war will his desires suffice,
  That makes this challenge to our strength) our valours to avow;
  To whom, if he can 'scape with life, he will be glad to bow."
  This drew his brother from his will, who yielded, knowing it true,
  And his glad soldiers took his arms; when Nestor did pursue
  The same reproof he set on foot, and thus supplied his turn:
  "What huge indignity is this! How will our country mourn!
  Old Peleus that good king will weep, that worthy counsellor,
  That trumpet of the Myrmidons, who much did ask me for
  All men of name that went to Troy; with joy he did inquire
  Their valour and their towardness, and I made him admire;
  But, that ye all fear Hector now, if his grave ears shall hear,
  How will he lift his hands to heav'n, and pray that death may bear
  His grieved soul into the deep! O would to heav'n's great
    King, [3]
  Minerva, and the God of light, that now my youthful spring
  Did flourish in my willing veins, as when at Phæa's tow'rs
  About the streams of Jardanus, my gather'd Pylean pow'rs,
  And dart-employ'd Arcadians, fought, near raging Celadon!
  Amongst whom, first of all, stood forth great Ereuthalion,
  Who th' arms of Arëithoús wore, brave Arëithoús,
  And, since he still fought with a club, surnam'd Clavigerus,
  All men, and fair-girt ladies both, for honour call'd him so.
  He fought not with a keep-off spear, or with a far-shot bow,
  But, with a massy club of iron, he broke through arméd bands.
  And yet Lycurgus was his death, but not with force of hands;
  With sleight (encount'ring in a lane, where his club wanted sway)
  He thrust him through his spacious waist; who fell, and upwards
    lay,
  In death not bowing his face to earth; his arms he did despoil,
  Which iron Mars bestow'd on him; and those, in Mars's toil,
  Lycurgus ever after wore; but when he agéd grew,
  Enforc'd to keep his peaceful house, their use he did renew
  On mighty Ereuthalion's limbs, his soldier, lovéd well;
  And, with these arms he challeng'd all, that did in arms excel;
  All shook, and stood dismay'd, none durst his adverse champion
    make.
  Yet this same forward mind of mine, of choice, would undertake
  To fight with all his confidence; though youngest enemy
  Of all the army we conduct, yet I fought with him, I,
  Minerva made me so renown'd, and that most tall strong peer
  I slew; his big bulk lay on earth, extended here and there,
  As it were covetous to spread the centre ev'rywhere.
  O that my youth were now as fresh, and all my pow'rs as sound,
  Soon should bold Hector be impugn'd! Yet you that most are crown'd
  With fortitude of all our host, ev'n you methinks are slow,
  Not free, and set on fire with lust, t' encounter such a foe."
  With this, nine royal princes rose. Atrides for the first;
  Then Diomed; th' Ajaces then, that did th' encounter thirst;
  King Idomen and his consórts; Mars-like Meriones;
  Evemon's son, Eurypylus: and Andræmonides,
  Whom all the Grecians Thoas call'd, sprung of Andræmon's blood;
  And wise Ulysses; ev'ry one, propos'd for combat, stood.
  Again Gerenius Nestor spake: "Let lots be drawn by all;
  His hand shall help the well-arm'd Greeks, on whom the lot doth
    fall,
  And to his wish shall he be help'd, if he escape with life
  The harmful danger-breathing fit of his advent'rous strife."
  Each mark'd his lot, and cast it into Agamemnon's casque.
  The soldiers pray'd, held up their hands, and this of Jove did ask,
  With eyes advanc'd to heav'n: "O Jove, so lead the herald's hand,
  That Ajax, or great Tydeus' son, may our wish'd champion stand,
  Or else the king himself that rules the rich Mycenian land."
  This said, old Nestor mix'd the lots. The foremost lot survey'd
  With Ajax Telamon was sign'd, as all the soldiers pray'd;
  One of the heralds drew it forth, who brought and show'd it round,
  Beginning at the right hand first, to all the most renown'd.
  None knowing it, ev'ry man denied; but when he forth did pass
  To him which mark'd and cast it in; which famous Ajax was,
  He stretch'd his hand, and into it the herald put the lot,
  Who, viewing it, th' inscription knew; the duke deniéd not,
  But joyfully acknowledg'd it, and threw it at his feet,
  And said: "O friends, the lot is mine, which to my soul is sweet;
  For now I hope my fame shall rise, in noble Hector's fall.
  But, whilst I arm myself, do you on great Saturnius call,
  But silently, or to yourselves, that not a Trojan hear;
  Or openly, if you think good, since none alive we fear.
  None with a will, if I will not, can my bold pow'rs affright,
  At least for plain fierce swing of strength, or want of skill in
    fight;
  For I will well prove that my birth; and breed, in Salamine
  Was not all consecrate to meat, or mere effects of wine."
  This said, the well-giv'n soldiers pray'd; up went to heav'n their
    eyne:
  "O Jove, that Ida dost protect, most happy, most divine,
  Send victory to Ajax' side; fame; grace his goodly limb;
  Or (if thy love bless Hector's life, and thou hast care of him.)
  Bestow on both like pow'r, like fame." This said, in bright arms,
    shone
  The good strong Ajax; who, when all his war attire was on,
  March'd like the hugely-figur'd Mars, when angry Jupiter
  With strength, on people proud of strength, sends him forth to
    infer
  Wreakful contention, and comes on with presence full of fear;
  So th' Achive rampire, Telamon, did 'twixt the hosts appear;
  Smil'd; yet of terrible aspéct; on earth, with ample pace,
  He boldly stalk'd, and shook aloft his dart with deadly grace.
  It did the Grecians good to see; but heartquakes shook the joints
  Of all the Trojans, Hector's self felt thoughts, with horrid
    points,
  Tempt his bold bosom; but he now must make no counterflight,
  Nor, with his honour, now refuse, that had provok'd the fight.
  Ajax came near; and, like a tow'r, his shield his bosom barr'd,
  The right side brass, and sev'n ox-hides within it quilted
    hard; [4]
  Old Tychius, the best currier; that did in Hyla dwell,
  Did frame it for exceeding proof, and wrought it wondrous well.
  With this stood he to Hector close, and with this brave began:
  "Now, Hector, thou shalt clearly know, thus meeting man to man,
  What other leaders arm our host, besides great Thetis' son,
  Who with his hardy lion's heart hath armies overrun;
  But he lies at our crook'd-stern'd fleet, a rival with our king
  In height of spirit; yet to Troy he many knights did bring,
  Coequal with Æacides, all able to sustain
  All thy bold challenge can import. Begin then, words are vain,"
  The helm-grac'd Hector answer'd him: "Renownéd Telamon,
  Prince of the soldiers came from Greece, assay not me, like one
  Young and immartial, with great words, as to an Amazon dame;
  I have the habit of all fights, and know the bloody frame
  Of ev'ry slaughter; I well know the ready right hand charge,
  I know the left, and ev'ry sway of my secureful targe;
  I triumph in the cruelty of fixéd combat fight,
  And manage horse to all designs; I think then with good right
  I may be confident as far as this my challenge goes,
  Without being taxéd' with a vaunt, borne out with empty shows.
  But, being a soldier so renown'd, I will not work on thee
  With least advantage of that skill I know doth strengthen me,
  And so, with privity of sleight, win that for which I strive,
  But at thy best, ev'n open strength, if my endeavours thrive."
  Thus sent he his long jav'lin forth. It strook his foe's huge
    shield
  Near to the upper skirt of brass, which was the eighth it held.
  Six folds th' untamed dart strook through, and in the sev'nth tough
    hide
  The point was check'd. Then Ajax threw; his angry lance did glide
  Quite through his bright orbicular targe, his curace, shirt of
    mail,
  And did his manly stomach's mouth with dang'rous taint assail;
  But, in the bowing of himself, black death too short did strike.
  Then both, to pluck their jav'lins forth, encounter'd, lion-like,
  Whose bloody violence is, increas'd by that raw food they eat,
  Or boars whose strength wild nourishment doth make so wondrous
    great.
  Again Priamides did wound in midst his shield of brass,
  Yet pierc'd not through the upper plate, the head reflected was.
  But Ajax, following his lance, smote through his target quite,
  And stay'd bold Hector rushing in; the lance held way outright,
  And hurt his neck; out gush'd the blood. Yet Hector ceas'd not so,
  But in his strong hand took a flint, as he did backwards go,
  Black, sharp, and big, laid in the field; the sev'nfold targe it
    smit
  Full on the boss, and round about the brass did ring with it.
  But Ajax a far greater stone lift up, and (wreathing round,
  With all his body laid to it) he sent it forth to wound,
  And gave unmeasur'd force to it; the round stone broke within
  His rundled target; his lov'd knees to languish did begin;
  And he lean'd, stretch'd out on his shield; but Phœbus rais'd him
    straight.
  Then had they laid on wounds with swords, in use of closer fight,
  Unless the heralds (messengers of Gods and godlike men)
  The one of Troy, the other Greece, had held betwixt them then
  Imperial sceptres; when the one, Idæus, grave and wise,
  Said to them: "Now no more, my sons; the Sov'reign of the skies
  Doth love you both; both soldiers are, all witness with good right;
  But now night lays her mace on earth; 'tis good t' obey the night."
  "Idæus," Telamon replied, "to Hector speak, not me;
  He that call'd all our Achive peers to station-fight, 'twas he;
  If he first cease, I gladly yield." Great Hector then began:
  "Ajax, since Jove, to thy big form, made thee so strong a man,
  And gave thee skill to use thy strength, so much, that for thy
    spear
  Thou art most excellent of Greece, now let us fight forbear.
  Hereafter we shall war again, till Jove our herald be,
  And grace with conquest which he will. Heav'n yields to night, and
    we.
  Go thou and comfort all thy fleet, all friends and men of thine,
  As I in Troy my favourers, who in the fane divine
  Have offer'd orisons for me; and come, let us impart
  Some ensigns of our strife, to show each other's suppled heart,
  That men of Troy and Greece may say, Thus their high quarrel ends.
  Those that, encount'ring, were such foes, are now, being sep'rate,
    friends,"
  He gave a sword, whose handle was with silver studs through
    driv'n, [5]
  Scabbard and all, with hangers rich. By Telamon was giv'n
  A fair well-glosséd purple waist. Thus Hector went to Troy,
  And after him a multitude, fill'd with his safety's joy,
  Despairing he could ever 'scape the puissant fortitude
  And unimpeachéd Ajax' hands. The Greeks like joy renew'd
  For their reputed victory, and brought him to the king;
  Who to the great Saturnides preferr'd an offering,
  An ox that fed on five fair springs; they flay'd and quarter'd
    him, [6]
  And then, in pieces cut, on spits they roasted ev'ry limb;
  Which neatly dress'd, they drew it off. Work done, they fell to
    feast;
  All had enough; but Telamon, the king fed past the rest
  With good large pieces of the chine. Thus thirst and hunger stay'd,
  Nestor, whose counsels late were best, vows new, and first he said:
  "Atrides, and my other lords, a sort of Greeks are dead,
  Whose black blood, near Scamander's stream, inhuman Mars hath shed;
  Their souls to hell descended are. It fits thee then, our king,
  To make our soldiers cease from war; and, by the day's first
    spring,
  Let us ourselves, assembled all, the bodies bear to fire,
  With mules and oxen near our fleet, that, when we home retire,
  Each man may carry to the sons, of fathers slaughter'd here,
  Their honour'd bones. One tomb for all, for ever, let us rear,
  Circling the pile without the field; at which we will erect
  Walls, and a rav'lin, that may safe our fleet and us protect.
  And in them let us fashion gates, solid, and barr'd about,
  Through which our horse, and chariots, may well get in and out.
  Without all, let us dig a dike, so deep it may avail
  Our forces 'gainst the charge of horse, and foot, that come t'
    assail.
  And thus th' attempts, that I see swell, in Troy's proud heart,
    shall fail."
  The kings do his advice approve. So Troy doth court convent
  At Priam's gate, in th' Ilion tow'r, fearful and turbulent.
  Amongst all, wise Antenor spake: "Trojans, and Dardan friends,
  And peers assistants, give good ear to what my care commends
  To your consents, for all our good. Resolve, let us restore
  The Argive Helen, with her wealth, to him she had before.
  We now defend but broken faiths. If, therefore, ye refuse,
  No good event can I expect of all the wars, we use."
  He ceas'd; and Alexander spake; husband to the Argive queen:
  "Antenor, to mine ears thy words harsh and ungracious been.
  Thou canst use better if thou wilt: but, if these truly fit
  Thy serious thoughts, the Gods with age have reft thy graver wit,
  To warlike Trojans I will speak: I clearly do deny
  To yield my wife, but all her wealth I render willingly,
  Whatever I from Argos brought, and vow to make it more,
  Which I have ready in my house, if peace I may restore."
  Priam, surnam'd Dardanides, godlike; in counsels grave;
  In his son's favour well-advis'd, this resolution gave:
  "My royal friends of ev'ry state, there is sufficient done,
  For this late council we have call'd, in th' offer of my son.
  Now then let all take needful food, then let the watch be set,
  And ev'ry court of guard held strong; so, when the morn doth wet
  The high-rais'd battlements of Troy, Idæus shall be sent
  To th' Argive fleet, and Atreus' sons, t' unfold my son's intent,
  From whose fact our contention springs; and, if they will, obtain
  Respite from heat of fight, till fire consume our soldiers slain;
  And after, our most fatal war let us importune still,
  Till Jove the conquest have dispos'd to his unconquer'd will."
  All heard, and did obey the king; and, in their quarters, all,
  That were to set the watch that night, did to their suppers fall.
  Idæus in the morning went, and th' Achive peers did find
  In council at Atrides' ship; his audience was assign'd;
  And, in the midst of all the kings, the vocal herald said:
  "Atrides! My renownéd king, and other kings, his aid,
  Propose by me, in their commands, the offers Paris makes,
  From whose joy all our woes proceed. He princely undertakes
  That all the wealth he brought from Greece (would he had died
    before!)
  He will, with other added wealth, for your amends restore
  But famous Menelaus' wife he still means to enjoy,
  Though he be urg'd the contrary, by all the peers of Troy.
  And this besides I have in charge, that, if it please you all,
  They wish both sides may cease from war, that rites of funeral
  May on their bodies be perform'd, that ill, the fields lie slain;
  And after, to the will of Fate, renew the fight again."
  All silence held at first; at last Tydides made reply:
  "Let no man take the wealth, or dame; for now a child's weak eye
  May see the imminent black end of Priam's empery."
  This sentence, quick and briefly giv'n, the Greeks did all admire.
  Then said, the king: "Herald, thou hear'st the voice entire
  Of all our peers, to answer thee, for that of Priam's son.
  But, for our burning of the dead, by all means I am won
  To satisfy thy king therein, without the slend'rest gain
  Made of their spoiléd carcasses; but freely, being slain,
  They shall be all consum'd with fire. To which I cite
  High thund'ring Jove; that is the king of Juno's delight."
  With this, he held his sceptre up, to all the sky-thron'd Pow'rs;
  And grave Idæus did return to sacred Ilion's tow'rs,
  Where Ilians, and Dardanians, did still their counsels ply,
  Expecting his return. He came, and told his legacy.
  All, whirlwind-like, assembled then, some bodies to transport,
  Some to hew trees. On th' other part, the Argives did exhort
  Their soldiers to the same affairs. Then, did the new fir'd sun
  Smite the broad fields, ascending heav'n, and th' ocean smooth did
    run;
  When Greece and Troy mix'd in such peace, you scarce could either
    know.
  Then wash'd they off their blood and dust, and did warm tears
    bestow
  Upon the slaughter'd, and in cars convey'd them from the field.
  Priam commanded none should mourn, but in still silence yield
  Their honour'd carcasses to fire, and only grieve in heart.
  All burn'd; to Troy Troy's friends retire, to fleet the Grecian
    part.
  Yet doubtful night obscur'd the earth, the day did not appear,
  When round about the fun'ral pile, the Grecians gather'd were.
  The pile they circled with a tomb, and by it rais'd a wall,
  High tow'rs, to guard the fleet and them; and in the midst of all
  They built strong gates, through which the horse and chariots
    passage had;
  Without the rampire a broad dike, long and profound, they made,
  On which they pallisadoes pitch'd; and thus the Grecians wrought.
  Their huge works in so little time were to perfection brought,
  That all Gods, by the Lightner set, the frame thereof admir'd;
  'Mongst whom the Earthquake-making God, this of their king
    inquir'd:
  "Father of Gods, will any man, of all earth's grassy sphere,
  Ask any of the Gods' consents to any actions there,
  If thou wilt see the shag-hair'd Greeks, with headstrong labours
    frame
  So huge a work, and not to us due off'rings first enflame?
  As far as white Aurora's dews are sprinkled through the air,
  Fame will renown the hands of Greece, for this divine affair;
  Men will forget the sacred work, the Sun and I did raise
  For king Laomedon (bright Troy) and this will bear the praise."
  Jove was extremely mov'd with him, and said: "What words are these,
  Thou mighty Shaker of the earth, thou Lord of all the seas?
  Some other God, of far less pow'r, might hold conceits, dismay'd
  With this rare Grecian stratagem, and thou rest well apaid; [7]
  For it will glorify thy name, as far as light extends;
  Since, when these Greeks shall see again their native soil and
    friends,
  The bulwark batter'd, thou mayst quite devour it with thy waves,
  And cover, with thy fruitless sands, this fatal shore of graves;
  That, what their fi'ry industries have so divinely wrought
  In raising it, in razing it thy pow'r will prove it nought."
  Thus spake the Gods among themselves. Set was the fervent sun;
  And now the great work of the Greeks was absolutely done.
  Then slew they oxen in their tents, and strength with food reviv'd,
  When out of Lemnos a great fleet of od'rous wine arrived,
  Sent by Eunëus, Jason's son, born of Hypsipyle.
  The fleet contain'd a thousand tun, which must transported be
  To Atreus' sons, as he gave charge, whose merchandise it was.
  The Greeks bought wine for shining steel, and some for sounding
    brass,
  Some for ox-hides, for oxen some, and some for prisoners.
  A sumptuous banquet was prepar'd; and all that night the peers
  And fair-hair'd Greeks consum'd in feast. So Trojans, and their
    aid.
  And all the night Jove thunder'd loud; pale fear all thoughts
    dismay'd.
  While they were gluttonous in earth, Jove wrought their banes in
    heav'n.
  They pour'd full cups upon the ground, and were to off'rings driv'n
  Instead of quaffings; and to drink, none durst attempt, before
  In solemn sacrifice they did almighty Jove adore.
  Then to their rests they all repair'd; bold zeal their fear
    bereav'd;
  And sudden sleep's refreshing gift, securely they receiv'd.