The morn arose, and from the ocean, in her saffron robe,
  Gave light to all, as well to Gods, as men of th' under globe.
  Thetis stoop'd home, and found the prostrate person of her son
  About his friend, still pouring out himself in passión;
  A number more being heavy consorts to him in his cares.
  Amongst them all Thetis appear'd and, sacred comforters,
  Made these short words: "Though we must grieve, yet bear it thus,
    my son,
  It was no man that prostrated, in this sad fashión,
  Thy dearest friend; it was a God that first laid on his hand,
  Whose will is law. The Gods' decrees, no human must withstand.
  Do thou embrace this fabric of a God, whose hand before
  Ne'er forg'd the like; and such as yet, no human shoulder wore."
  Thus, setting down, the precious metal of the arms was such
  That all the room rung with the weight of every slend'rest touch.
  Cold tremblings took the Myrmidons; none durst sustain, all fear'd
  T' oppose their eyes; Achilles yet, as soon as they appear'd,
  Stern Anger enter'd. From his eyes, as if the day-star rose,
  A radiance terrifying men did all the state enclose.
  At length he took into his hands the rich gift of the God,
  And, much pleas'd to behold the art that in the shield he show'd,
  He brake forth into this applause: "O mother, these right well
  Show an immortal finger's touch; man's hand must never deal
  With arms again. Now I will arm; yet, that no honour make
  My friend forgotten, I much fear, lest with the blows of flies
  His brass-inflicted wounds are fil'd; life gone, his person lies
  All apt to putrefactión." She bade him doubt no harm
  Of those offences, she would care, to keep the petulant swarm
  Of flies, that usually taint the bodies of the slain,
  From his friend's person. Though a year, the earth's top should
    sustain
  His slaughter'd body, it should still rest sound, and rather hold
  A better state than worse, since time that death first made him
    cold.
  And so bade call a council, to dispose of new alarms,
  Where, to the king, that was the pastor of that flock in arms,
  He should depose all anger, and put on a fortitude
  Fit for his arms. All this his pow'rs with dreadful strength
    indued.
  She, with her fair hand, still'd into the nostrils of his friend
  Red nectar and ambrosia; with which she did defend
  The corse from putrefactión. He trod along the shore,
  And summon'd all th' heroic Greeks, with all that spent before
  The time in exercise with him, the masters, pilots too,
  Vict'lers, and all. All, when they saw Achilles summon so,
  Swarm'd to the council, having long left the laborious wars.
  To all these came two halting kings, true servitors of Mars,
  Tydides and wise Ithacus, both leaning on their spears,
  Their wounds still painful; and both these sat first of all the
    peers.
  The last come was the king of men, sore wounded with the lance
  Of Coon Antenorides. All set, the first in utterance
  Was Thetis' son, who rose and said: "Atrides, had not this
  Conferr'd most profit to us both, when both our enmities
  Consum'd us so, and for a wench, whom, when I choos'd for prise,
  In laying Lyrnessus' ruin'd walls amongst our victories,
  I would to heav'n, as first she set her dainty foot aboard,
  Diana's hand had tumbled off, and with a jav'lin gor'd!
  For then th' unmeasurable earth had not so thick been gnawn,
  In death's convulsions, by our friends, since my affects were drawn
  To such distemper. To our foe, and to our foe's chief friend,
  Our jar brought profit; but the Greeks will never give an end
  To thought of what it prejudic'd them. Past things yet past our
    aid;
  Fit grief for what wrath rul'd in them, must make th' amends repaid
  With that necessity of love, that now forbids our ire;
  Which I with free affects obey. 'Tis for the senseless fire
  Still to be burning, having stuff; but men must curb rage still,
  Being fram'd with voluntary pow'rs, as well to check the will
  As give it reins. Give you then charge, that for our instant fight
  The Greeks may follow me to field, to try if still the night
  Will bear out Trojans at our ships. I hope there is some one,
  Amongst their chief encouragers, will thank me to be gone,
  And bring his heart down to his knees in that submissión."
  The Greeks rejoic'd to hear the heart of Peleus' mighty son
  So qualified. And then the king (not rising from his throne
  For his late hurt) to get good ear, thus order'd his reply:
  "Princes of Greece, your states shall suffer no indignity,
  If, being far off, ye stand and hear; nor fits it such as stand
  At greater distance, to disturb the council now in hand
  By uproar, in their too much care of hearing. Some, of force,
  Must lose some words; for hard it is, in such a great concourse
  (Though hearers' ears be ne'er so sharp) to touch at all things
    spoke;
  And in assemblies of such thrust, how can a man provoke
  Fit pow'r to hear, or leave to speak? Best auditors may there
  Lose fittest words, and the most vocal orator fit ear.
  My main end then, to satisfy Pelides with reply,
  My words shall prosecute; to him my speech especially
  Shall bear direction. Yet I wish, the court in general
  Would give fit ear; my speech shall need attentión of all.
  Oft have our peers of Greece much blam'd my forcing of the prise
  Due to Achilles; of which act, not I, but destinies,
  And Jove himself, and black Erinnys (that casts false mists still
  Betwixt us and our actions done, both by her pow'r and will)
  Are authors. What could I do then? The very day and hour
  Of our debate, that Fury stole in that act on my pow'r.
  And more; all things are done by strife; that ancient seed of Jove,
  Ate, that hurts all, perfects all, her feet are soft, and move
  Not on the earth, they bear her still aloft men's heads, and there
  The harmful hurts them. Nor was I alone her prisoner,
  Jove, best of men and Gods, hath been; not he himself hath gone
  Beyond her fetters, no, she made a woman put them on;
  For when Alcmena was to vent the force of Hercules
  In well-wall'd Thebes, thus Jove triumph'd: 'Hear, Gods and
    Goddesses,
  The words my joys urg'd: In this day, Lucina, bringing pain
  To labouring women, shall produce into the light of men
  A man that all his neighbour kings shall in his empire hold,
  And vaunt that more than manly race whose honour'd veins enfold
  My eminent blood.' Saturnia conceiv'd a present sleight,
  And urg'd confirmance of his vaunt t' infringe it; her conceit
  In this sort urg'd: 'Thou wilt not hold thy word with this rare
    man;
  Or, if thou wilt, confirm it with the oath Olympian,
  That whosoever falls this day betwixt a woman's knees,
  Of those men's stocks that from thy blood derive their pedigrees,
  Shall all his neighbour towns command.' Jove, ignorant of fraud,
  Took that great oath, which his great ill gave little cause t'
     applaud.
  Down from Olympus' top she stoop'd, and quickly reach'd the place
  In Argos where the famous wife of Sthenelus, whose race
  He fetch'd from Jove by Perseus, dwelt. She was but sev'n months
    gone
  With issue, yet she brought it forth; Alcmena's matchless son
  Delay'd from light, Saturnia repress'd the teeming throes
  Of his great mother. Up to heav'n she mounts again, and shows,
  In glory, her deceit to Jove. 'Bright-light'ning Jove,' said she,
  'Now th' Argives have an emperor; a son deriv'd from thee
  Is born to Persean Sthenelus, Eurystheus his name,
  Noble and worthy of the rule thou swor'st to him.' This came
  Close to the heart of Jupiter; and Ate, that had wrought
  This anger by Saturnia, by her bright hair he caught,
  Held down her head, and over her made this infallible vow:
  'That never to the cope of stars should reascend that brow,
  Being so infortunate to all.' Thus, swinging her about,
  He cast her from the fi'ry heav'n; who ever since thrust out
  Her fork'd sting in th' affairs of men. Jove ever since did grieve,
  Since his dear issue Hercules did by his vow achieve
  The unjust toils of Eurystheus. Thus fares it now with me,
  Since under Hector's violence the Grecian progeny
  Fell so unfitly by my spleen; whose falls will ever stick
  In my griev'd thoughts: my weakness yet (Saturnius making sick
  The state my mind held) now recur'd, th' amends shall make ev'n
    weight
  With my offence. And therefore rouse thy spirits to the fight
  With all thy forces; all the gifts, propos'd thee at thy tent
  Last day by royal Ithacus, my officers shall present.
  And, if it like thee, strike no stroke, though never so on thorns
  Thy mind stands to thy friend's revenge, till my command adorns
  Thy tents and coffers with such gifts, as well may let thee know
  How much I wish thee satisfied." He answer'd: "Let thy vow,
  Renown'd Atrides, at thy will be kept, as justice would,
  Or keep thy gifts; 'tis all in thee. The council now we hold
  Is for repairing our main field with all our fortitude.
  My fair show made brooks no retreat, nor must delays delude
  Our deed's expectance. Yet undone the great work is. All eyes
  Must see Achilles in first fight depeopling enemies,
  As well as counsel it in court; that ev'ry man set on
  May choose his man to imitate my exercise upon."
  Ulysses answer'd: "Do not yet, thou man made like the Gods,
  Take fasting men to field. Suppose, that whatsoever odds
  It brings against them with full men, thy boundless eminence
  Can amply answer, yet refrain to tempt a violence.
  The conflict wearing out our men was late, and held as long,
  Wherein, though most Jove stood for Troy, he yet made our part
    strong
  To bear that most. But 'twas to bear, and that breeds little heart.
  Let wine and bread then add to it; they help the twofold part,
  The soul and body, in a man, both force and fortitude.
  All day men cannot fight and fast, though never so indued
  With minds to fight, for, that suppos'd, there lurks yet secretly
  Thirst, hunger, in th' oppresséd joints, which no mind can supply.
  They take away a marcher's knees. Men's bodies throughly fed,
  Their minds share with them in their strength; and, all day
    combated,
  One stirs not, till you call off all. Dismiss them then to meat,
  And let Atrides tender here, in sight of all this seat,
  The gifts he promis'd. Let him swear before us all, and rise
  To that oath, that he never touch'd in any wanton wise
  The lady he enforc'd. Besides, that he remains in mind
  As chastely satisfied; not touch'd, or privily inclin'd
  With future vantages. And last, 'tis fit he should approve
  All these rites at a solemn feast in honour of your love,
  That so you take no mangled law for merits absolute.
  And thus the honours you receive, resolving the pursuit
  Of your friend's quarrel, well will quit your sorrow for your
    friend.
  And thou, Atrides, in the taste of so severe an end,
  Hereafter may on others hold a juster government;
  Nor will it aught impair a king, to give a sound content
  To any subject soundly wrong'd." "I joy," replied the king,
  "O Laertiades, to hear thy lib'ral counselling;
  In which is all decorum kept, nor any point lacks touch
  That might be thought on to conclude a reconcilement such
  As fits example, and us two. My mind yet makes me swear,
  Not your impulsion; and that mind shall rest so kind and clear,
  That I will not forswear to God. Let then Achilles stay,
  Though never so inflam'd for fight, and all men here I pray
  To stay, till from my tents these gifts be brought here, and the
    truce
  At all parts finish'd before all. And thou of all I choose,
  Divine Ulysses, and command to choose of all your host
  Youths of most honour, to present, to him we honour most,
  The gifts we late vow'd, and the dames. Mean space about our tents
  Talthybius shall provide a boar, to crown these kind events
  With thankful sacrifice to Jove, and to the God of Light."
  Achilles answer'd: "These affairs will show more requisite,
  Great king of men, some other time, when our more free estates
  Yield fit cessation from the war, and when my spleen abates;
  But now, to all our shames besides, our friends by Hector slain
  (And Jove to friend) lie unfetch'd off. Haste, then, and meat your
    men;
  Though, I must still say, my command would lead them fasting forth,
  And all together feast at night. Meat will be something worth,
  When stomachs first have made it way with venting infamy,
  And other sorrows late sustain'd, with long'd-for wreaks, that lie
  Heavy upon them, for right's sake. Before which load be got
  From off my stomach, meat nor drink, I vow, shall down my throat,
  My friend being dead, who digg'd with wounds, and bor'd through
    both his feet,
  Lies in the entry of my tent, and in the tears doth fleet
  Of his associates. Meat and drink have little merit then
  To comfort me; but blood, and death, and deadly groans of men."
  The great in counsels yet made good his former counsels thus:
  "O Peleus' son, of all the Greeks by much most valorous,
  Better and mightier than myself no little with thy lance
  I yield thy worth; in wisdom, yet, no less I dare advance
  My right above thee, since above in years, and knowing more.
  Let then thy mind rest in thy words. We quickly shall have store
  And all satiety of fight, whose steel heaps store of straw
  And little corn upon a floor, when Jove, that doth withdraw
  And join all battles, once begins t' incline his balances,
  In which he weighs the lives of men. The Greeks you must not press
  To mourning with the belly; death hath nought to do with that
  In healthful men that mourn for friends. His steel we stumble at,
  And fall at, ev'ry day, you see, sufficient store, and fast.
  What hour is it that any breathes? We must not use; more haste,
  Than speed holds fit for our revenge. Nor should we mourn too much.
  Who dead is, must be buriéd. Men's patience should be such,
  That one day's moan should serve one man. The dead must end with
    death,
  And life last with what strengthens life. All those that held their
    breath
  From death in fight the more should eat, that so they may supply
  Their fellows that have stuck in field, and fight incessantly.
  Let none expect reply to this, nor stay; for this shall stand
  Or fall with some offence to him that looks for new command,
  Whoever in dislike holds back. All join then, all things fit
  Allow'd for all; set on a charge, at all parts answering it."
  This said, he chose, for noblest youths to bear the presents,
    these:
  The sons of Nestor, and with them renown'd Meriones,
  Phylides, Thoas, Lycomed, and Meges, all which went,
  And Menalippus, following Ulysses to the tent
  Of Agamemnon. He but spake, and with the word the deed
  Had join'd effect. The fitness well was answer'd in the speed.
  The presents, added to the dame the Gen'ral did enforce,
  Were twenty caldrons, tripods sev'n, twelve young and goodly horse;
  Sev'n ladies excellently seen in all Minerva's skill,
  The eighth Briseis who had pow'r to ravish ev'ry will;
  Twelve talents of the finest gold, all which Ulysses weigh'd
  And carried first; and after him, the other youths convey'd
  The other presents, tender'd all in face of all the court.
  Up rose the king. Talthybius, whose voice had a report
  Like to a God, call'd to the rites. There having brought the boar,
  Atrides with his knife took say upon the part before,
  And lifting up his sacred hands, to Jove to make his vows,
  Grave silence strook the cómplete court; when, casting his high
    brows
  Up to the broad heav'n, thus he spake: "Now witness, Jupiter,
  First, highest, and thou best of Gods; thou Earth that all dost
    bear;
  Thou Sun; ye Furies under earth that ev'ry soul torment
  Whom impious perjury distains; that nought incontinent
  In bed, or any other act to any slend'rest touch
  Of my light vows, hath wrong'd the dame; and, let my plagues be
    such
  As are inflicted by the Gods, in all extremity
  Of whomsoever perjur'd men, if godless perjury
  In least degree dishonour me." This said, the bristled throat
  Of the submitted sacrifice, with ruthless steel he cut;
  Which straight into the hoary sea Talthybius cast, to feed
  The sea-born nation. Then stood up the half-celestial seed
  Of fair-hair'd Thetis, strength'ning thus Atrides' innocence:
  "O father Jupiter, from thee descends the confluence
  Of all man's ill; for now I see the mighty king of men
  At no hand forc'd away my prise, nor first inflam'd my spleen
  With any set ill in himself, but thou, the King of Gods,
  Incens'd with Greece, made that the mean to all their periods.
  Which now amend we as we may, and give all suffrages
  To what wise Ithacus advis'd; take breakfasts, and address
  For instant conflict." Thus he rais'd the court, and all took way
  To sev'ral ships. The Myrmidons the presents did convey
  T' Achilles' fleet, and in his tents dispos'd them; doing grace
  Of seat and all rights to the dames; the horses put in place
  With others of Æacides. When, like love's golden Queen,
  Briseis all in ghastly wounds had dead Patroclus seen,
  She fell about him, shrieking out, and with her white hands tore
  Her hair, breasts, radiant cheeks, and, drown'd in warm tears, did
    deplore
  His cruel destiny. At length she gat pow'r to express
  Her violent passion, and thus spake this like-the-goddesses:
  "O good Patroclus, to my life the dearest grace it had,
  I, wretched dame, departing hence, enforc'd, and dying sad,
  Left thee alive, when thou hadst cheer'd my poor captivity,
  And now return'd I find thee dead; misery on misery
  Ever increasing with my steps. The lord to whom my sire
  And dearest mother gave my life in nuptials, his life's fire
  I saw before our city gates extinguish'd: and his fate
  Three of my worthy brothers' lives, in one womb generate,
  Felt all in that black day of death. And when Achilles' hand
  Had slain all these, and ras'd the town Mynetes did command,
  (All cause of never-ending griefs presented) thou took'st all
  On thy endeavour to convert to joy as general,
  Affirming, he that hurt should heal, and thou wouldst make thy
    friend,
  Brave captain that thou wert, supply my vowéd husband's end,
  And in rich Phthia celebrate, amongst his Myrmidons,
  Our nuptial banquets; for which grace, with these most worthy moans
  I never shall be satiate, thou ever being kind,
  Ever delightsome, one sweet grace fed still with one sweet mind."
  Thus spake she weeping; and with her, did th' other ladies moan
  Patroclus' fortunes in pretext, but in sad truth their own.
  About Æacides himself the kings of Greece were plac'd,
  Entreating him to food; and he entreated them as fast,
  Still intermixing words and sighs, if any friend were there
  Of all his dearest, they would cease, and offer him no cheer
  But his due sorrows; for before the sun had left that sky
  He would not eat, but of that day sustain th' extremity.
  Thus all the kings, in res'lute grief and fasting, he dismiss'd;
  But both th' Atrides, Ithacus, and war's old Martialist,
  Idomenëus and his friend, and Phœnix, these remain'd
  Endeavouring comfort, but no thought of his vow'd woe restrain'd.
  Nor could, till that day's bloody fight had calm'd his blood; he
    still
  Remember'd something of his friend, whose good was all his ill.
  Their urging meat the diligent fashion of his friend renew'd
  In that excitement: "Thou," said he, "when this speed was pursued
  Against the Trojans, evermore apposedst in my tent
  A pleasing breakfast; being so free, and sweetly diligent,
  Thou mad'st all meat sweet. Then the war was tearful to our foe
  But now to me; thy wounds so wound me, and thy overthrow;
  For which my ready food I fly, and on thy longings feed.
  Nothing could more afflict me; Fame relating the foul deed
  Of my dear father's slaughter, blood drawn from my sole son's
    heart,
  No more could wound me. Curséd man, that in this foreign part
  (For hateful Helen) my true love, my country, sire, and son,
  I thus should part with. Scyros now gives educatión, [1]
  O Neoptolemus, to thee, if living yet; from whence
  I hop'd, dear friend, thy longer life safely return'd from hence,
  And my life quitting thine, had pow'r to ship him home, and show
  His young eyes Phthia, subjects, court; my father being now
  Dead, or most short-liv'd, troublous age oppressing him, and fear
  Still of my death's news." These sad words, he blew into the ear
  Of ev'ry visitant with sighs, all echo'd by the peers,
  Rememb'ring who they left at home. All whose so humane tears
  Jove pitied; and, since they all would in the good of one
  Be much reviv'd, he thus bespake Minerva: "Thetis' son,
  Now, daughter, thou hast quite forgot. O, is Achilles care
  Extinguish'd in thee? Prostrated in most extreme ill fare,
  He lies before his high-sail'd fleet, for his dead friend; the rest
  Are strength'ning them with meat, but he lies desp'rately oppress'd
  With heartless fasting. Go thy ways, and to his breast instill
  Red nectar and ambrosia, that fast procure no ill
  To his near enterprise." This spur he added to the free,
  And, like a harpy, with a voice that shrieks so dreadfully,
  And feathers that like needles prick'd, she stoop'd through all the
    stars,
  Amongst the Grecians, all whose tents were now fill'd for the wars;
  Her seres strook through Achilles' tent, and closely she instill'd
  Heav'n's most-to-be-desired feast to his great breast, and fill'd
  His sinews with that sweet supply, for fear unsavoury fast
  Should creep into his knees. Herself the skies again enchas'd.
  The host set forth, and pour'd his steel waves far out of the
    fleet.
  And as from air the frosty north wind blows a cold thick sleet,
  That dazzles eyes, flakes after flakes incessantly descending;
  So thick, helms, curets, ashen darts, and round shields, never
    ending,
  Flow'd from the navy's hollow womb. Their splendours gave heav'n's
    eye
  His beams again. Earth laugh'd to see her face so like the sky;
  Arms shin'd so hot, and she such clouds made with the dust she
    cast,
  She thunder'd, feet of men and horse importun'd her so fast.
  In midst of all, divine Achilles his fair person arm'd,
  His teeth gnash'd as he stood, his eyes so full of fire they
    warm'd,
  Unsuffer'd grief and anger at the Trojans so combin'd.
  His greaves first us'd, his goodly curets on his bosom shin'd,
  His sword, his shield that cast a brightness from it like the moon.
  And as from sea sailors discern a harmful fire let run
  By herdsmen's faults, till all their stall flies up in wrestling
    flame;
  Which being on hills is seen far off; but being alone, none came
  To give it quench, at shore no neighbours, and at sea their friends
  Driv'n off with tempests; such a fire, from his bright shield
    extends
  His ominous radiance, and in heav'n impress'd his fervent blaze.
  His crested helmet, grave and high, had next triumphant place
  On his curl'd head, and like a star it cast a spurry ray,
  About which a bright thicken'd bush of golden hair did play,
  Which Vulcan forg'd him for his plume. Thus cómplete arm'd, he
    tried
  How fit they were, and if his motion could with ease abide
  Their brave instruction; and so far they were from hind'ring it,
  That to it they were nimble wings, and made so light his spirit,
  That from the earth the princely captain they took up to air.
  Then from his armoury he drew his lance, his father's spear,
  Huge, weighty, firm, that not a Greek but he himself alone
  Knew how to shake; it grew upon the mountain Pelion,
  From whóse height Chiron hew'd it for his sire, and fatal 'twas
  To great-soul'd men, of Peleus and Pelion surnam'd Pelias.
  Then from the stable their bright horse, Automedon withdraws
  And Alcymus; put poitrils on, and cast upon their jaws
  Their bridles, hurling back the reins, and hung them on the seat.
  The fair scourge then Automedon takes up, and up doth get
  To guide the horse. The fight's seat last, Achilles took behind;
  Who look'd so arm'd as if the sun, there fall'n from heav'n, had
    shin'd,
  And terribly thus charg'd his steeds: "Xanthus and Balius,
  Seed of the Harpy, in the charge ye undertake of us,
  Discharge it not as when Patroclus ye left dead in field,
  But, when with blood, for this day's fast observ'd, revenge shall
    yield
  Our heart satiety, bring us off." Thus, since Achilles spake
  As if his aw'd steeds understood, 'twas Juno's will to make
  Vocal the palate of the one; who, shaking his fair head,
  (Which in his mane, let fall to earth, he almost buried)
  Thus Xanthus spake: "Ablest Achilles, now, at least, our care
  Shall bring thee off; but not far hence the fatal minutes are
  Of thy grave ruin. Nor shall we be then to be reprov'd,
  But mightiest Fate, and the great God. Nor was thy best belov'd
  Spoil'd so of arms by our slow pace, or courage's impair;
  The best of Gods, Latona's son, that wears the golden hair,
  Gave him his death's wound; though the grace he gave to Hector's
    hand.
  We, like the spirit of the west, that all spirits can command
  For pow'r of wing, could run him off; but thou thyself must go,
  So fate ordains; God and a man must give thee overthrow."
  This said, the Furies stopp'd his voice. Achilles, far in rage,
  Thus answer'd him: "It fits not thee, thus proudly to presage
  My overthrow. I know myself, it is my fate to fall
  Thus far from Phthia; yet that fate shall fail to vent her gall,
  Till mine vent thousands." These words us'd, he fell to horrid
    deeds,
  Gave dreadful signal, and forthright made fly his one-hoof'd
    steeds.
