The games perform'd; the soldiers wholly dispers'd to fleet,
  Supper and sleep their only care. Constant Achilles yet
  Wept for his friend, nor sleep itself, that all things doth subdue,
  Could touch at him; this way and that he turn'd, and did renew
  His friend's dear memory, his grace in managing his strength,
  And his strength's greatness, how life rack'd into their utmost
    length
  Griefs, battles, and the wraths of seas, in their joint sufferance.
  Each thought of which turn'd to a tear. Sometimes he would advance,
  In tumbling on the shore, his side; sometimes his face: then turn
  Flat on his bosom; start upright. Although he saw the morn
  Show sea and shore his ecstasy, he left not, till at last
  Rage varied his distraction; horse, chariot, in haste
  He call'd for; and, those join'd, the corse was to his chariot
    tied,
  And thrice about the sepulchre he made his fury ride,
  Dragging the person. All this past; in his pavilion
  Rest seiz'd him, but with Hector's corse his rage had never done,
  Still suff'ring it t' oppress the dust. Apollo yet, ev'n dead,
  Pitied the prince, and would not see inhuman tyranny fed
  With more pollution of his limbs; and therefore cover'd round
  His person with his golden shield, that rude dogs might not wound
  His manly lineaments, which threat Achilles cruelly
  Had us'd in fury. But now Heav'n let fall a gen'ral eye
  Of pity on him; the blest Gods persuaded Mercury,
  Their good observer, to his stealth; and ev'ry Deity
  Stood pleas'd with it; Juno except, green Neptune, and the Maid
  Grac'd with the blue eyes, all their hearts stood hatefully appaid
  Long since, and held it, as at first, to Priam, Ilion,
  And all his subjects, for the rape of his licentious son,
  Proud Paris, that despis'd these Dames in their divine access
  Made to his cottage, and prais'd Her that his sad wantonness
  So costly nourish'd. The twelfth morn now shin'd on the delay
  Of Hector's rescue, and then spake the Deity of the Day
  Thus to th' Immortals: "Shameless Gods, authors of ill ye are
  To suffer ill. Hath Hector's life at all times show'd his care
  Of all your rights, in burning thighs of beeves and goats to you,
  And are your cares no more of him? Vouchsafe ye not ev'n now,
  Ev'n dead, to keep him, that his wife, his mother, and his son,
  Father, and subjects, may be mov'd to those deeds he hath done,
  Seeing you preserve him that serv'd you, and sending to their hands
  His person for the rites of fire? Achilles, that withstands
  All help to others, you can help; one that hath neither heart
  Nor soul within him, that will move or yield to any part
  That fits a man, but lion-like, uplandish, and mere wild,
  Slave to his pride, and all his nerves being naturally compil'd
  Of eminent strength, stalks out and preys upon a silly sheep.
  And so fares this man, that fit ruth that now should draw so deep
  In all the world being lost in him; and shame, a quality [1]
  Of so much weight, that both it helps and hurts excessively
  Men in their manners, is not known, nor hath the pow'r to be,
  In this man's being. Other men a greater loss than he
  Have undergone, a son, suppose, or brother of one womb;
  Yet, after dues of woes and tears, they bury in his tomb
  All their deplorings. Fates have giv'n to all that are true men
  True manly patience; but this man so soothes his bloody vein
  That no blood serves it, he must have divine-soul'd Hector bound
  To his proud chariot, and danc'd in a most barbarous round
  About his lov'd friend's sepulchre, when he is slain. 'Tis vile,
  And draws no profit after it. But let him now awhile
  Mark but our angers; he is spent; let all his strength take heed
  It tempts not our wraths; he begets, in this outrageous deed,
  The dull earth with his fury's hate." White-wristed Juno said,
  Being much incens'd, "This doom is one that thou wouldst have
    obey'd,
  Thou bearer of the silver bow, that we in equal care
  And honour should hold Hector's worth, with him that claims a share
  In our deservings. Hector suck'd a mortal woman's breast,
  Æacides a Goddess's; ourself had interest
  Both in his infant nourishment, and bringing up with state,
  And to the human Peleüs we gave his bridal mate,
  Because he had th' Immortals' love. To celebrate the feast
  Of their high nuptials, ev'ry God was glad to be a guest;
  And thou fedd'st of his father's cates, touching thy harp in grace
  Of that beginning of our friend, whom thy perfidious face,
  In his perfection, blusheth not to match with Priam's son,
  O thou that to betray and shame art still companion!"
  Jove thus receiv'd her: "Never give these broad terms to a God.
  Those two men shall not be compar'd; and yet, of all that trod
  The well-pav'd Ilion, none so dear to all the Deities
  As Hector was; at least to me, for off'rings most of prize
  His hands would never pretermit. Our altars ever stood
  Furnish'd with banquets fitting us, odours and ev'ry good
  Smok'd in our temples; and for this, foreseeing it, his fate
  We mark'd with honour, which must stand. But, to give stealth
    estate
  In his deliv'rance, shun we that; nor must we favour one
  To shame another. Privily, with wrong to Thetis' son,
  We must not work out Hector's right. There is a ransom due,
  And open course, by laws of arms; in which must humbly sue
  The friends of Hector. Which just mean if any God would stay,
  And use the other, 'twould not serve; for Thetis night and day
  Is guardian to him. But would one call Iris hither, I
  Would give directions that for gifts the Trojan king should buy
  His Hector's body, which the son of Thetis shall resign."
  This said, his will was done; the Dame that doth in vapours shine,
  Dewy and thin, footed with storms, jump'd to the sable seas
  'Twixt Samos and sharp Imber's cliffs; the lake groan'd with the
    press
  Of her rough feet, and, plummet-like, put in an ox's horn
  That bears death to the raw-fed fish, she div'd, and found forlorn
  Thetis lamenting her son's fate, who was in Troy to have,
  Far from his country, his death serv'd. Close to her Iris stood,
  And said: "Rise, Thetis, prudent Jove, whose counsels thirst not
    blood,
  Calls for thee." Thetis answer'd her with asking: "What's the cause
  The great God calls? My sad pow'rs fear'd to break th' immortal
    laws,
  In going fil'd with griefs to heav'n. But He sets snares for none
  With colour'd counsels; not a word of him but shall be done."
  She said, and took a sable veil (a blacker never wore
  A heav'nly shoulder) and gave way. Swift Iris swum before.
  About both roll'd the brackish waves. They took their banks, and
    flew
  Up to Olympus; where they found Saturnius far-of-view
  Spher'd with heav'n's ever-being States. Minerva rose, and gave
  Her place to Thetis near to Jove; and Juno did receive
  Her entry with a cup of gold, in which she drank to her,
  Grac'd her with comfort, and the cup to her hand did refer.
  She drank, resigning it; and then the Sire of men and Gods
  Thus entertain'd her: "Com'st thou up to these our blest abodes,
  Fair Goddess Thetis, yet art sad; and that in so high kind
  As passeth suff'rance? This I know, and tried thee, and now find
  Thy will by mine rul'd, which is rule to all worlds' government.
  Besides this trial yet, this cause sent down for thy ascent,
  Nine days' contention hath been held amongst th' Immortals here
  For Hector's person and thy son; and some advices were
  To have our good spy Mercury steal from thy son the corse;
  But that reproach I kept far off, to keep in future force
  Thy former love and reverence. Haste then, and tell thy son
  The Gods are angry, and myself take that wrong he hath done
  To Hector in worst part of all, the rather since he still
  Detains his person. Charge him then, if he respect my will
  For any reason, to resign slain Hector. I will send
  Iris to Priam to redeem his son, and recommend
  Fit ransom to Achilles' grace, in which right he may joy
  And end his vain grief." To this charge bright Thetis did employ
  Instant endeavour. From heav'n's tops she reach'd Achilles' tent,
  Found him still sighing, and some friends with all their complement
  Soothing his humour; other some with all contentión
  Dressing his dinner, all their pains and skills consum'd upon
  A huge wool-bearer, slaughter'd there. His rev'rend mother then
  Came near, took kindly his fair hand, and ask'd him: "Dear son,
    when
  Will sorrow leave thee? How long time wilt thou thus eat thy heart,
  Fed with no other food, nor rest? 'Twere good thou wouldst divert
  Thy friend's love to some lady, cheer thy spirits with such kind
    parts
  As she can quit thy grace withal. The joy of thy deserts
  I shall not long have, death is near, and thy all-conqu'ring fate,
  Whose haste thou must not haste with grief, but understand the
    state
  Of things belonging to thy life, which quickly order. I
  Am sent from Jove t' advértise thee, that ev'ry Deity
  Is angry with thee, himself most, that rage thus reigns in thee
  Still to keep Hector. Quit him then, and, for fit ransom, free
  His injur'd person." He replied: "Let him come that shall give
  The ransom, and the person take. Jove's pleasure must deprive
  Men of all pleasures." This good speech, and many more, the son
  And mother us'd, in ear of all the naval statión.
  And now to holy Ilion Saturnius Iris sent:
  "Go, swift-foot Iris, bid Troy's king bear fit gifts, and content
  Achilles for his son's release; but let him greet alone
  The Grecian navy; not a man, excepting such a one
  As may his horse and chariot guide, a herald, or one old,
  Attending him; and let him take his Hector. Be he bold,
  Discourag'd nor with death nor fear, wise Mercury shall guide
  His passage till the prince be near; and, he gone, let him ride
  Resolv'd ev'n in Achilles' tent. He shall not touch the state
  Of his high person, nor admit the deadliest desperate
  Of all about him; for, though fierce, he is not yet unwise,
  Nor inconsid'rate, nor a man past awe of Deities,
  But passing free and curious to do a suppliant grace,
  This said, the Rainbow to her feet tied whirlwinds, and the place
  Reach'd instantly. The heavy court Clamour and Mourning fill'd;
  The sons all set about the sire; and there stood Grief, and still'd
  Tears on their garments. In the midst the old king sate, his weed
  All wrinkled, head and neck dust-fil'd; the princesses his seed,
  The princesses his sons' fair wives, all mourning by; the thought
  Of friends so many, and so good, being turn'd so soon to nought
  By Grecian hands, consum'd their youth, rain'd beauty from their
    eyes.
  Iris came near the king; her sight shook all his faculties,
  And therefore spake she soft, and said: "Be glad, Dardanides;
  Of good occurrents, and none ill, am I ambassadress.
  Jove greets thee, who, in care, as much as he is distant, deigns
  Eye to thy sorrows, pitying thee. My ambassy contains
  This charge to thee from him: He wills thou shouldst redeem thy
    son,
  Bear gifts t' Achilles, cheer him so; but visit him alone,
  None but some herald let attend, thy mules and chariot
  To manage for thee. Fear nor death let daunt thee, Jove hath got
  Hermes to guide thee, who as near to Thetis' son as needs
  Shall guard thee; and being once with him, nor his, nor others',
    deeds
  Stand touch'd with, he will all contain; nor is he mad, nor vain,
  Nor impious, but with all his nerves studious to entertain
  One that submits with all fit grace." Thus vanish'd she like wind.
  He mules and chariot calls, his sons bids see them join'd, and bind
  A trunk behind it; he himself down to his wardrobe goes,
  Built all of cedar, highly roof'd, and odoriferous,
  That much stuff, worth the sight, contain'd. To him he call'd his
    queen,
  Thus greeting her: "Come, hapless dame, an angel I have seen,
  Sent down from Jove, that bade me free our dear son from the fleet
  With ransom pleasing to our foe. What holds thy judgment meet?
  My strength and spirit lays high charge on all my being to bear
  The Greeks' worst, vent'ring through their host." The queen cried
    out to hear
  His vent'rous purpose, and replied: "O whither now is fled
  The late discretion that renown'd thy grave and knowing head
  In foreign and thine own rul'd realms, that thus thou dar'st assay
  Sight of that man, in whose brow sticks the horrible decay
  Of sons so many, and so strong? Thy heart is iron I think.
  If this stern man, whose thirst of blood makes cruelty his drink,
  Take, or but see, thee, thou art dead. He nothing pities woe,
  Nor honours age. Without his sight, we have enough to do
  To mourn with thought of him. Keep we our palace, weep we here,
  Our son is past our helps. Those throes, that my deliv'rers were
  Of his unhappy lineaments, told me they should be torn
  With black-foot dogs. Almighty Fate, that black hour he was born,
  Spun in his springing thread that end; far from his parents' reach,
  This bloody fellow then ordain'd to be their mean, this wretch,
  Whose stony liver would to heav'n I might devour, my teeth
  My son's revengers made! Curs'd Greek, he gave him not his death
  Doing an ill work; he alone fought for his country, he
  Fled not, nor fear'd, but stood his worst; and curséd policy
  Was his undoing." He replied: "Whatever was his end
  Is not our question, we must now use all means to defend
  His end from scandal; from which act dissuade not my just will,
  Nor let me nourish in my house a bird presaging ill
  To my good actions; 'tis in vain. Had any earthly spirit
  Giv'n this suggestion, if our priests, or soothsay'rs, challenging
    merit
  Of prophets, I might hold it false, and be the rather mov'd
  To keep my palace, but these ears and these self eyes approv'd
  It was a Goddess. I will go; for not a word She spake
  I know was idle. If it were, and that my fate will make
  Quick riddance of me at the fleet, kill me, Achilles; come,
  When getting to thee, I shall find a happy dying room
  On Hector's bosom, when enough thirst of my tears finds there
  Quench to his fervour." This resolv'd, the works most fair and dear
  Of his rich screens he brought abroad; twelve veils wrought
    curiously;
  Twelve plain gowns; and as many suits of wealthy tapestry;
  As many mantles; horsemen's coats; ten talents of fine gold;
  Two tripods; caldrons four; a bowl, whose value he did hold
  Beyond all price, presented by th' ambassadors of Thrace.
  The old king nothing held too dear, to rescue from disgrace
  His gracious Hector. Forth he came. At entry of his court
  The Trojan citizens so press'd, that this opprobrious sort
  Of check he us'd: "Hence, cast-aways! Away, ye impious crew!
  Are not your griefs enough at home? What come ye here to view?
  Care ye for my griefs? Would ye see how miserable I am?
  Is't not enough, imagine ye? Ye might know, ere ye came,
  What such a son's loss weigh'd with me. But know this for your
    pains,
  Your houses have the weaker doors; the Greeks will find their gains
  The easier for his loss, be sure. But O Troy! ere I see
  Thy ruin, let the doors of hell receive and ruin me!"
  Thus with his sceptre set he on the crowding citizens,
  Who gave back, seeing him so urge. And now he entertains
  His sons as roughly, Helenus, Paris, Hippothous,
  Pammon, divine Agathones, renown'd Deiphobus,
  Agavus, and Antiphonus, and last, not least in arms,
  The strong Polites: these nine sons the violence of his harms
  Help'd him to vent in these sharp terms: "Haste, you infamous
    brood,
  And get my chariot. Would to heav'n that all the abject blood
  In all your veins had Hector 'scus'd! O me, accurséd man,
  All my good sons are gone, my light the shades Cimmerian
  Have swallow'd from me. I have lost Mestor, surnam'd the fair;
  Troilus, that ready knight at arms, that made his field repair
  Ever so prompt and joyfully; and Hector, amongst men
  Esteem'd a God, not from a mortal's seed, but of th' Eternal
    strain,
  He seem'd to all eyes. These are gone, you that survive are base,
  Liars and common freebooters; all faulty, not a grace,
  But in your heels, in all your parts; dancing companions
  Ye all are excellent. Hence, ye brats! Love ye to hear my moans?
  Will ye not get my chariot? Command it quickly, fly,
  That I may perfect this dear work." This all did terrify;
  And straight his mule-drawn chariot came, to which they fast did
    bind
  The trunk with gifts. And then came forth, with an afflicted mind,
  Old Hecuba. In her right hand a bowl of gold she bore
  With sweet wine crown'd, stood near, and said: "Receive this, and
    implore,
  With sacrificing it to Jove, thy safe return. I see
  Thy mind likes still to go, though mine dislikes it utterly.
  Pray to the black-cloud-gath'ring God, Idæan Jove, that views
  All Troy, and all her miseries, that he will deign to use
  His most-lov'd bird to ratify thy hopes, that, her broad wing
  Spread on thy right hand, thou mayst know thy zealous offering
  Accepted, and thy safe return confirm'd; but if he fail,
  Fail thy intent, though never so it labours to prevail."
  "This I refuse not," he replied, "for no faith is so great
  In Jove's high favour, but it must with held-up hands intreat."
  This said, the chambermaid, that held the ewer and basin by,
  He bade pour water on his hands; when, looking to the sky,
  He took the bowl, did sacrifice, and thus implor'd: "O Jove,
  From Ida using thy commands, in all deserts above
  All other Gods, vouchsafe me safe, and pity in the sight
  Of great Achilles; and, for trust to that wish'd grace, excite
  Thy swift-wing'd Messenger, most strong, most of air's region
    lov'd,
  To soar on my right hand; which sight may firmly see approv'd
  Thy former summons, and my speed." He pray'd, and heav'n's King
    heard,
  And instantly cast from his fist air's all-commanding bird,
  The black-wing'd huntress, perfectest of all fowls, which Gods call
  Percnos, the eagle. And how broad the chamber nuptial
  Of any mighty man hath doors, such breadth cast either wing;
  Which now she us'd, and spread them wide on right hand of the king.
  All saw it, and rejoic'd, and up to chariot he arose,
  Drave forth, the portal and the porch resounding as he goes.
  His friends all follow'd him, and mourn'd as if he went to die;
  And bringing him past town to field, all left him; and the eye
  Of Jupiter was then his guard, who pitied him, and us'd
  These words to Hermes: "Mercury, thy help hath been profus'd
  Ever with most grace in consorts of travellers distress'd,
  Now cónsort Priam to the fleet; but so, that not the least
  Suspicion of him be attain'd, till at Achilles' tent
  The convoy hath arriv'd him safe." This charge incontinent
  He put in practice. To his feet his feather'd shoes he tied,
  Immortal, and made all of gold, with which he us'd to ride
  The rough sea and th' unmeasur'd earth, and equall'd in his pace
  The puffs of wind. Then took he up his rod, that hath the grace
  To shut what eyes he lists with sleep, and open them again
  In strongest trances. This he held, flew forth, and did attain
  To Troy and Hellespontus straight. Then like a fair young prince,
  First-down-chinn'd, and of such a grace as makes his looks convince
  Contending eyes to view him, forth he went to meet the king.
  He, having pass'd the mighty tomb of Ilus, watering
  His mules in Xanthus, the dark even fell on the earth; and then
  Idæus (guider of the mules) discern'd this grace of men,
  And spake afraid to Priamus: "Beware, Dardanides,
  Our states ask counsel; I discern the dangerous access
  Of some man near us; now I fear we perish. Is it best
  To fly, or kiss his knees and ask his ruth of men distress'd?"
  Confusion strook the king, cold fear extremely quench'd his veins,
  Upright upon his languishing head his hair stood, and the chains
  Of strong amaze bound all his pow'rs. To both which then came near
  The prince turn'd Deity, took his hand, and thus bespake the peer:
  "To what place, father, driv'st thou out through solitary night,
  When others sleep? Give not the Greeks sufficient cause of fright
  To these late travels, being so near, and such vow'd enemies?
  Of all which, if with all this load any should cast his eyes
  On thy adventures, what would then thy mind esteem thy state,
  Thyself old, and thy follow'r old? Resistance could not rate
  At any value; as for me, be sure I mind no harm
  To thy grave person, but against the hurt of others arm.
  Mine own lov'd father did not get a greater love in me
  To his good, than thou dost to thine." He answer'd: "The degree
  Of danger in my course, fair son, is nothing less than that
  Thou urgest; but some God's fair hand puts in for my safe state,
  That sends so sweet a guardian in this so stern a time
  Of night, and danger, as thyself, that all grace in his prime
  Of body and of beauty show'st, all answer'd with a mind
  So knowing, that it cannot be but of some blessed kind
  Thou art descended." "Not untrue," said Hermes, "thy conceit
  In all this holds; but further truth relate, if of such weight
  As I conceive thy carriage be, and that thy care conveys
  Thy goods of most price to more guard; or go ye all your ways
  Frighted from holy Ilion, so excellent a son
  As thou hadst (being your special strength) fallen to destructión,
  Whom no Greek better'd for his fight?" "O, what art thou," said he,
  "Most worthy youth, of what race born, that thus recount'st to me
  My wretched son's death with such truth?" "Now, father," he
    replied,
  "You tempt me far, in wond'ring how the death was signified
  Of your divine son to a man so mere a stranger here
  As you hold me; but I am one that oft have seen him bear
  His person like a God in field; and when in heaps he slew
  The Greeks, all routed to their fleet, his so victorious view
  Made me admire, not feel his hand; because Æacides,
  Incens'd, admitted not our fight, myself being of access
  To his high person, serving him, and both to Ilion
  In one ship sail'd. Besides, by birth I breathe a Myrmidon,
  Polyctor, call'd the rich, my sire, declin'd with age like you.
  Six sons he hath, and me a seventh; and all those six live now
  In Phthia, since, all casting lots, my chance did only fall
  To follow hither. Now for walk I left my General.
  To-morrow all the sun-burn'd Greeks will circle Troy with arms,
  The princes rage to be withheld so idly, your alarms
  Not giv'n half hot enough they think, and can contain no more."
  He answer'd: "If you serve the prince, let me be bold t' implore
  This grace of thee, and tell me true: Lies Hector here at fleet,
  Or have the dogs his flesh?" He said: "Nor dogs nor fowl have yet
  Touch'd at his person; still he lies at fleet, and in the tent
  Of our great Captain, who indeed is much too negligent
  Of his fit usage. But, though now twelve days have spent their heat
  On his cold body, neither worms with any taint have eat,
  Nor putrefaction perish'd it; yet ever, when the Morn
  Lifts her divine light from the sea, unmercifully borne
  About Patroclus' sepulchre, it bears his friend's disdain,
  Bound to his chariot; but no fits of further outrage reign
  In his distemper. You would muse to see how deep a dew
  Ev'n steeps the body, all the blood wash'd off, no slend'rest shew
  Of gore or quitture, but his wounds all clos'd, though many were
  Open'd about him. Such a love the blest Immortals bear,
  Ev'n dead, to thy dear son, because his life show'd love to them."
  He joyful answer'd: "O my son, it is a grace supreme
  In any man to serve the Gods. And I must needs say this;
  For no cause, having season fit, my Hector's hands would miss
  Advancement to the Gods with gifts, and therefore do not they
  Miss his remembrance after death. Now let an old man pray
  Thy graces to receive this cup, and keep it for my love,
  Nor leave me till the Gods and thee have made my pray'rs approve
  Achilles' pity, by thy guide brought to his princely tent."
  Hermes replied: "You tempt me now, old king, to a consent
  Far from me, though youth aptly errs. I secretly receive
  Gifts that I cannot broadly vouch, take graces that will give
  My lord dishonour, or what he knows not, or will esteem
  Perhaps unfit? Such briberies perhaps at first may seem
  Sweet and secure; but futurely they still prove sour, and breed
  Both fear and danger. I could wish thy grave affairs did need
  My guide to Argos, either shipp'd, or lackeying by thy side,
  And would be studious in thy guard, so nothing could be tried
  But care in me to keep thee safe, for that I could excuse,
  And vouch to all men." These words past, he put the deeds in use
  For which Jove sent him; up he leapt to Priam's chariot,
  Took scourge and reins, and blew in strength to his free steeds,
    and got
  The naval tow'rs and deep dike straight. The guards were all at
    meat;
  Those he enslumber'd, op'd the ports, and in he safely let
  Old Priam with his wealthy prize. Forthwith they reach'd the tent
  Of great Achilles, large and high, and in his most ascent
  A shaggy roof of seedy reeds mown from the meads; a hall
  Of state they made their king in it, and strengthen'd it withall
  Thick with fir rafters; whose approach was let in by a door
  That had but one bar, but so big that three men evermore
  Rais'd it to shut, three fresh take down; which yet Æacides
  Would shut and ope himself. And this with far more ease
  Hermes set ope, ent'ring the king; then leapt from horse, and said:
  "Now know, old king, that Mercury, a God, hath giv'n this aid
  To thy endeavour, sent by Jove; and now away must I,
  For men would envy thy estate to see a Deity
  Affect a man thus. Enter thou, embrace Achilles' knee,
  And by his sire, son, mother, pray his ruth and grace to thee."
  This said, he high Olympus reach'd. The king then left his coach
  To grave Idæus, and went on, made his resolv'd approach,
  And enter'd in a goodly room, where with his princes sate
  Jove-lov'd Achilles, at their feast; two only kept the state
  Of his attendance, Alcimus, and lord Automedon,
  At Priam's entry. A great time Achilles gaz'd upon
  His wonder'd-at approach, nor ate; the rest did nothing see,
  While close he came up, with his hands fast holding the bent knee
  Of Hector's conqueror, and kiss'd that large man-slaught'ring hand
  That much blood from his sons had drawn. And as in some strange
    land,
  And great man's house, a man is driv'n (with that abhorr'd dismay
  That follows wilful bloodshed still, his fortune being to slay
  One whose blood cries aloud for his) to plead protectión,
  In such a miserable plight as frights the lookers on;
  In such a stupefied estate Achilles sat to see
  So unexpected, so in night, and so incredibly,
  Old Priam's entry. All his friends one on another star'd
  To see his strange looks, seeing no cause. Thus Priam then prepar'd
  His son's redemption: "See in me, O God-like Thetis' son,
  Thy aged father; and perhaps ev'n now being out-run
  With some of my woes, neighbour foes (thou absent) taking time
  To do him mischief; no mean left to terrify the crime
  Of his oppression; yet he hears thy graces still survive,
  And joys to hear it, hoping still to see thee safe arrive
  From ruin'd Troy; but I, curs'd man, of all my race shall live
  To see none living. Fifty sons the Deities did give
  My hopes to live in; all alive when near our trembling shore
  The Greek ships harbour'd, and one womb nineteen of those sons
    bore.
  Now Mars a number of their knees hath strength less left; and he
  That was, of all, my only joy, and Troy's sole guard, by thee,
  Late fighting for his country, slain; whose tender'd person now
  I come to ransom. Infinite is that I offer you,
  Myself conferring it, expos'd alone to all your odds,
  Only imploring right of arms. Achilles! Fear the Gods,
  Pity an old man like thy sire; diff'rent in only this,
  That I am wretcheder, and bear that weight of miseries
  That never man did, my curs'd lips enforc'd to kiss that hand
  That slew my children." This mov'd tears; his father's name did
    stand,
  Mention'd by Priam, in much help to his compassion,
  And mov'd Æacides so much, he could not look upon
  The weeping father. With his hand he gently put away
  His grave face. Calm remission now did mutually display
  Her pow'r in either's heaviness. Old Priam, to record
  His son's death and his deathsman see, his tears and bosom pour'd
  Before Achilles; at his feet he laid his rev'rend head.
  Achilles' thoughts, now with his sire, now with his friend, were
    fed.
  Betwixt both sorrow fill'd the tent. But now Æacides
  (Satiate at all parts with the ruth of their calamities)
  Start up, and up he rais'd the king. His milk-white head and beard
  With pity he beheld, and said: "Poor man, thy mind is scar'd
  With much afflictión. How durst thy person thus alone
  Venture on his sight, that hath slain so many a worthy son,
  And so dear to thee? Thy old heart is made of iron. Sit,
  And settle we our woes, though huge, for nothing profits it.
  Cold mourning wastes but our lives' heats. The Gods have destinate
  That wretched mortals must live sad; 'tis the Immortal State
  Of Deity that lives secure. Two tuns of gifts there lie
  In Jove's gate, one of good, one ill, that our mortality
  Maintain, spoil, order; which when Jove doth mix to any man,
  One while he frolics, one while mourns. If of his mournful can
  A man drinks only, only wrongs he doth expose him to,
  Sad hunger in th' abundant earth doth toss him to and fro,
  Respected nor of Gods nor men. The mix'd cup Peleus drank
  Ev'n from his birth; Heav'n blest his life; he liv'd not that could
    thank
  The Gods for such rare benefits as set forth his estate.
  He reign'd among his Myrmidons most rich, most fortunate,
  And, though a mortal, had his bed deck'd with a deathless dame.
  And yet, with all this good, one ill God mix'd, that takes all name
  From all that goodness; his name now, whose preservation here
  Men count the crown of their most good, not bless'd with pow'r to
    bear
  One blossom but myself, and I shaken as soon as blown;
  Nor shall I live to cheer his age, and give nutritión
  To him that nourish'd me. Far off my rest is set in Troy,
  To leave thee restless and thy seed; thyself that did enjoy,
  As we have heard, a happy life; what Lesbos doth contain,
  In times past being a bless'd man's seat, what the unmeasur'd main
  Of Hellespontus, Phrygia, holds, are all said to adorn
  Thy empire, wealth and sons enow; but, when the Gods did turn
  Thy blest state to partake with bane, war and the bloods of men
  Circled thy city, never clear. Sit down and suffer then;
  Mourn not inevitable things; thy tears can spring no deeds
  To help thee, nor recall thy son; impatience ever breeds
  Ill upon ill, makes worst things worse, and therefore sit." He
    said:
  "Give me no seat, great seed of Jove, when yet unransomed
  Hector lies riteless in thy tents, but deign with utmost speed
  His resignation, that these eyes may see his person freed,
  And thy grace satisfied with gifts. Accept what I have brought,
  And turn to Phthia; 'tis enough thy conqu'ring hand hath fought
  Till Hector falter'd under it, and Hector's father stood
  With free humanity safe." He frown'd and said: "Give not my blood
  Fresh cause of fury. I know well I must resign thy son,
  Jove by my mother utter'd it; and what besides is done
  I know as amply; and thyself, old Priam, I know too.
  Some God hath brought thee; for no man durst use a thought to go
  On such a service. I have guards, and I have gates to stay
  Easy accesses; do not then presume thy will can sway,
  Like Jove's will, and incense again my quench'd blood, lest nor
    thou
  Nor Jove get the command of me." This made the old king bow,
  And down he sat in fear. The prince leapt like a lion forth,
  Automedon and Alcimus attending: all the worth
  Brought for the body they took down and brought in, and with it
  Idæus, herald to the king; a coat embroider'd yet,
  And two rich cloaks, they left to hide the person. Thetis' son
  Call'd out his women, to anoint and quickly overrun
  The corse with water, lifting it in private to the coach,
  Lest Priam saw, and his cold blood embrac'd a fi'ry touch
  Of anger at the turpitude profaning it, and blew
  Again his wrath's fire to his death. This done, his women threw
  The coat and cloak on; but the corse Achilles' own hand laid
  Upon a bed, and with his friends to chariot it convey'd.
  For which forc'd grace, abhorring so from his free mind, he wept,
  Cried out for anger, and thus pray'd: "O friend, do not except
  Against this favour to our foe, if in the deep thou hear,
  And that I give him to his sire; he gave fair ransom; dear
  In my observance is Jove's will; and whatsoever part
  Of all these gifts by any mean I fitly may convert
  To thy renown here, and will there, it shall be pour'd upon
  Thy honour'd sepulchre. This said, he went, and what was done
  Told Priam, saying: "Father, now thy will's fit rites are paid,
  Thy son is giv'n up; in the morn thine eyes shall see him laid
  Deck'd in thy chariot on his bed; in mean space let us eat.
  The rich-hair'd Niobe found thoughts that made her take her meat,
  Though twelve dear children she saw slain, six daughters, six young
    sons.
  The sons incens'd Apollo slew; the maids' confusions
  Diana wrought; since Niobe her merits durst compare
  With great Latona's, arguing that she did only bear
  Two children, and herself had twelve; for which those only two
  Slew all her twelve. Nine days they lay steep'd in their blood, her
    woe
  Found no friend to afford them fire, Saturnius had turn'd
  Humans to stones. The tenth day yet, the good Celestials burn'd
  The trunks themselves, and Niobe, when she was tir'd with tears,
  Fell to her food, and now with rocks and wild hills mix'd she bears
  In Sipylus the Gods' wrath still, in that place where 'tis said
  The Goddess Fairies use to dance about the fun'ral bed
  Of Achelous, where, though turn'd with cold grief to a stone,
  Heav'n gives her heat enough to feel what plague comparison
  With his pow'rs made by earth deserves. Affect not then too far
  Without grief, like a God, being a man, but for a man's life care,
  And take fit food; thou shalt have time beside to mourn thy son;
  He shall be tearful, thou being full; not here, but Ilion
  Shall find thee weeping-rooms enow." He said, and so arose,
  And caus'd a silver-fleec'd sheep kill'd; his friends' skills did
    dispose
  The flaying, cutting of it up, and cookly spitted it,
  Roasted, and drew it artfully. Automedon, as fit
  Was for the rev'rend sewer's place; and all the brown joints serv'd
  On wicker vessel to the board; Achilles' own hands kerv'd;
  And close they fell to. Hunger stanch'd; talk, and observing time,
  Was us'd of all hands. Priam sat amaz'd to see the prime
  Of Thetis' son, accomplish'd so with stature, looks, and grace,
  In which the fashion of a God he thought had chang'd his place.
  Achilles fell to him as fast, admir'd as much his years
  Told in his grave and good aspect; his speech ev'n charm'd his
    ears,
  So order'd, so material. With this food feasted too,
  Old Priam spake thus: "Now, Jove's seed, command that I may go,
  And add to this feast grace of rest. These lids ne'er clos'd mine
    eyes,
  Since under thy hands fled the soul of my dear son; sighs, cries,
  And woes, all use from food and sleep have taken; the base courts
  Of my sad palace made my beds, where all the abject sorts
  Of sorrow I have variéd, tumbled in dust, and hid;
  No bit, no drop, of sust'nance touch'd." Then did Achilles bid
  His men and women see his bed laid down, and coveréd
  With purple blankets, and on them an arras coverlid,
  Waistcoats of silk plush laying by. The women straight took lights,
  And two beds made with utmost speed, and all the other rites
  Their lord nam'd us'd, who pleasantly the king in hand thus bore:
  "Good father, you must sleep without; lest any counsellor
  Make his access in depth of night, as oft their industry
  Brings them t' impart our war-affairs; of whom should any eye
  Discern your presence, his next steps to Agamemnon fly,
  And then shall I lose all these gifts. But go to, signify,
  And that with truth, how many days you mean to keep the state
  Of Hector's funerals; because so long would I rebate
  Mine own edge set to sack your town, and all our host contain
  From interruption of your rites." He answer'd: "If you mean
  To suffer such rites to my son, you shall perform a part
  Of most grace to me. But you know with how dismay'd a heart
  Our host took Troy; and how much fear will therefore apprehend
  Their spirits to make out again, so far as we must send
  For wood to raise our heap of death; unless I may assure
  That this your high grace will stand good, and make their pass
    secure;
  Which if you seriously confirm, nine days I mean to mourn;
  The tenth keep funeral and feast; th' eleventh raise and adorn
  My son's fit sepulchre; the twelfth, if we must needs, we'll
    fight."
  "Be it," replied Æacides, "do Hector all this right;
  I'll hold war back those whole twelve days; of which, to free all
    fear,
  Take this my right hand." This confirm'd, the old king rested
    there;
  His herald lodg'd by him; and both in forepart of the tent;
  Achilles in an inmost room of wondrous ornament,
  Whose side bright-cheek'd Briseis warm'd. Soft sleep tam'd Gods and
    men,
  All but most-useful Mercury; sleep could not lay one chain
  On his quick temples, taking care for getting off again
  Engagéd Priam undiscern'd of those that did maintain
  The sacred watch. Above his head he stood with this demand:
  "O father, sleep'st thou so secure, still lying in the hand
  Of so much ill, and being dismiss'd by great Æacides?
  'Tis true thou hast redeem'd the dead; but for thy life's release,
  Should Agamemnon hear thee here, three times the price now paid
  Thy sons' hands must repay for thee." This said, the king, afraid,
  Start from his sleep, Idæus call'd, and, for both, Mercury
  The horse and mules, before loos'd, join'd so soft and curiously
  That no ear heard, and through the host drave; but when they drew
  To gulfy Xanthus' bright-wav'd stream, up to Olympus flew
  Industrious Mercury. And now the saffron Morning rose,
  Spreading her white robe over all the world; when, full of woes,
  They scourg'd on with the corse to Troy, from whence no eye had
    seen,
  Before Cassandra, their return. She, like love's golden Queen,
  Ascending Pergamus, discern'd her father's person nigh,
  His herald, and her brother's corse; and then she cast this cry
  Round about Troy: "O Trojans, if ever ye did greet
  Hector return'd from fight alive, now look ye out and meet
  His ransom'd person. Then his worth was all your city's joy,
  Now do it honour." Out all rush'd; woman nor man in Troy
  Was left, a most unmeasur'd cry took up their voices. Close
  To Scæa's ports they met the corse; and to it headlong goes
  The rev'rend mother, the dear wife; upon it strow their hair,
  And lie entrancéd. Round about the people broke the air
  In lamentations; and all day had stay'd the people there,
  If Priam had not cried "Give way, give me but leave to bear
  The body home, and mourn your fills." Then cleft the press, and
    gave
  Way to the chariot. To the court herald Idæus drave
  Where on a rich bed they bestow'd the honour'd person, round
  Girt it with singers that the woe with skilful voices crown'd.
  A woeful elegy they sung, wept singing, and the dames
  Sigh'd as they sung. Andromache the downright prose exclaims
  Began to all; she on the neck of slaughter'd Hector fell,
  And cried out: "O my husband, thou in youth bad'st youth farewell,
  Left'st me a widow, thy sole son an infant; ourselves curs'd
  In our birth made him right our child: for all my care that nurs'd
  His infancy will never give life to his youth, ere that
  Troy from her top will be destroy'd; thou guardian of our state,
  Thou ev'n of all her strength the strength, thou, that in care wert
    past
  Her careful mothers of their babes, being gone, how can she last?
  Soon will the swoln fleet fill her womb with all their servitude,
  Myself with them, and thou with me, dear son, in labours rude
  Shalt be employ'd, sternly survey'd by cruel conquerors;
  Or, rage not suff'ring life so long, some one, whose hate abhors
  Thy presence (putting him in mind of his sire slain by thine,
  His brother, son, or friend) shall work thy ruin before mine,
  Toss'd from some tow'r, for many Greeks have ate earth from the
    hand
  Of thy strong father; in sad fight his spirit was too much mann'd,
  And therefore mourn his people; we, thy parents, my dear lord,
  For that thou mak'st endure a woe, black, and to be abhorr'd.
  Of all yet thou hast left me worst, not dying in thy bed,
  And reaching me thy last-rais'd hand, in nothing counselléd
  Nothing commanded by that pow'r thou hadst of me to do
  Some deed for thy sake. O for these never will end my woe,
  Never my tears cease." Thus wept she, and all the ladies clos'd
  Her passion with a gen'ral shriek. Then Hecuba dispos'd
  Her thoughts in like words; "O my son, of all mine much most dear,
  Dear while thou liv'dst too ev'n to Gods, and after death they were
  Careful to save thee. Being best, thou most wert envied;
  My other sons Achilles sold; but thee he left not dead.
  Imber and Samos, the false ports of Lemnos entertain'd
  Their persons; thine, no port but death. Nor there in rest remain'd
  Thy violated corse, the tomb of his great friend was spher'd
  With thy dragg'd person; yet from death he was not therefore rear'd
  But, all his rage us'd, so the Gods have tender'd thy dead state,
  Thou liest as living, sweet and fresh, as he that felt the fate
  Of Phœbus' holy shafts." These words the queen us'd for her moan,
  And, next her, Helen held that state of speech and passión:
  "O Hector, all my brothers more were not so lov'd of me
  As thy most virtues. Not my lord I held so dear, as thee,
  That brought me hither; before which I would I had been brought
  To ruin; for what breeds that wish (which is the mischief wrought
  By my access) yet never found one harsh taunt, one word's ill,
  From thy sweet carriage. Twenty years do now their circles fill
  Since my arrival; all which time thou didst not only bear
  Thyself without check, but all else, that my lord's brothers were,
  Their sisters' lords, sisters themselves, the queen my
    mother-in-law,
  (The king being never but most mild) when thy man's spirit saw
  Sour and reproachful, it would still reprove their bitterness
  With sweet words, and thy gentle soul. And therefore thy decease
  I truly mourn for; and myself curse as the wretched cause;
  All broad Troy yielding me not one, that any human laws
  Of pity or forgiveness mov'd t'entreat me humanly,
  But only thee, all else abhorr'd me for my destiny."
  These words made ev'n the commons mourn; to whom the king said:
    "Friends,
  Now fetch wood for our fun'ral fire, nor fear the foe intends
  Ambush, or any violence; Achilles gave his word,
  At my dismission, that twelve days he would keep sheath'd his
    sword,
  And all men's else." Thus oxen, mules, in chariots straight they
    put,
  Went forth and an unmeasur'd pile of sylvan matter cut;
  Nine days employ'd in carriage, but when the tenth morn shin'd
  On wretched mortals, then they brought the fit-to-be-divin'd
  Forth to be burn'd. Troy swum in tears. Upon the pile's most height
  They laid the person, and gave fire. All day it burn'd, all night.
  But when th' elev'nth morn let on earth her rosy fingers shine,
  The people flock'd about the pile, and first with blackish wine
  Quench'd all the flames. His brothers then, and friends, the snowy
    bones
  Gather'd into an urn of gold, still pouring on their moans.
  Then wrapt they in soft purple veils the rich urn, digg'd a pit,
  Grav'd it, ramm'd up the grave with stones, and quickly built to it
  A sepulchre. But, while that work and all the fun'ral rites
  Were in performance, guards were held at all parts, days and
    nights,
  For fear of false surprise before they had impos'd the crown
  To these solemnities. The tomb advanc'd once, all the town
  In Jove-nurs'd Priam's Court partook a passing sumptuous feast.
  And so horse-taming Hector's rites gave up his soul to rest.
